# Rationale: 

Year Zero is a post-baccalaureate program designed 
for students with essentially no computational background. This 
course, Algorithms, introduces the subject as both a way of 
thinking about problems, breaking them down into their component 
parts, as well as explicit descriptions of computation, the 
function of which are open to interrogation. We will examine 
extremely elementary notions of complexity, but focus deeply on 
the ways in which algorithms create interpretations of data.


# Syllabus:

## 3. CSJxxx Algorithms, 3 units

Description: Algorithms are at the heart of computer 
processing --- they are descriptions of computation. We will 
present a basic taxonomy of algorithms based on their purpose 
and discuss complexity (will an algorithm take a lot of time or 
require significant system resources?). The course will be 
anchored around several algorithms developed for or by 
journalism, the digital humanities, computational social 
science, data journalism, architecture and other fields. 
Examples might include some aspect of natural language 
processing, computer vision or statistical/machine learning. 
Students will learn a process of questioning computation and its 
artifacts, of examining an algorithm and assessing its 
capabilities and its biases -- How does it function? What are 
its implicit assumptions? How should we test its operation? What 
does it leave out? In the process, students will also learn best 
practices for writing, documenting and publishing algorithms and 
code.

Grading: While the precise grading of the course will depend on 
the instructor, it should be structured around a series of 
weekly short readings and assignments, 2-3 longer assignments 
and a final project. The shorter drills help students 
learn to structure simple objects as data, while the longer 
assignments involve more substantial building. The final project 
could be individual or group, with the latter requiring 
documentation of each participantâ€™s role, and should involve 
creating a new or applying a significant existing algorithm.

Textbooks: Material for this course will come from journalism 
(aggregation, algorithmically generated stories, social media 
mining), from the digital humanities (document clustering, 
natural language processing) and computational social science. 
We will also draw readings from design and the arts -- Given 
the expanding role of computation in creative practices, books 
like Form+Code by Reas and MacWilliams become useful references.

## Approximate topic outline:

- Introduction
    - Algorithmic thinking as a strategy for solving problems
    - Algorithms as recipes for computation
    - Examples of algorithmic data processing in journalism, the digital humanities and computational social science
- Case studies in algorithm design and function
    - Examples might include:
        - Algorithmic story generation
        - Personalization and collaborative filtering
        - Entity extraction in Natural Language Processing
        - News aggregation
        - Decision trees for statistical modeling
        - Summary statistics in networks

In each case, students will consider the underlying question or 
computation the algorithm addresses, and break it down into 
subtasks. They will write a basic implementation on their own 
and start to ask questions about the operation of each part. 
Finally, they will work with pre-existing, complete 
implementation of the algorithm and examine its performance.

Our interest here is in both formal operating characteristics 
(does this operation take a long time?) as well as the ways in 
which the algorithm structures knowledge about the data it 
processes, the inferences it exposes or the picture it draws.

## Case study of a classic algorithm

We will consider one simple example to illustrate a traditional 
analysis of an algorithm -- Searching seems like a good choice, 
with rich alternatives depending on the available data to 
incorporate

- Basic computer architecture
- Beginning treatment of notions of complexity
